update Observability diagrams (#11582)
kyma-project/kyma: docs/05-technical-reference/03-architecture/obsv-03-architecture-tracing.md

title: Tracing Architecture

> ---

Author: @a-thaler Is this more like it?

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/76950046/124452485-b8c1d900-dd86-11eb-970b-41f8095a8483.png)

> 

Author: Draft:
`
The process of collecting traces by Jaeger looks as follows:

1. The application receives a request, either from an internal or external source.
2. If the application has Istio injection enabled, [Istio proxy](https://github.com/istio/proxy) propagates the correct [HTTP headers](docs/05-technical-reference/other-tracing-envoy-http-headers.md) of the requests to the Jaeger Deployment. Istio proxy calls Jaeger using the [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/) service, which exposes a Jaeger port compatible with the Zipkin protocol.  
3. Jaeger stores the trace data on a PersistentVolume and makes the trace information available using an API and UI.`

> 

Reviewer: Collect traces flow: 
Merge point 2 and 3, summarizing that it eithers goes through port-forwarding directly to Jaeger or via ingress passing the oauth2-proxy, which assures authenticated users via configured OIDC provider

Author: Suggestion:

> The process of querying traces from Jaeger looks as follows:
> 
> 1. A Kyma user accesses the Jaeger UI to look for specific traces.
> 2. The user has [two options](../../../04-operation-guides/operations/obsv-02-access-expose-kiali-grafana.md) to pass the request to the Jaeger Query service and retrieve the trace information: 
>   - If port forwarding has been set up, the user can access the Jaeger UI directly.
>   - If authentication using a OIDC provider has been configured, the request goes through the [Istio Ingress Gateway](TO_DO), which forwards the incoming connections to the service. Jaeger Query passes the request to the [Keycloak Gatekeeper](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-gatekeeper) for authorization. The Gatekeeper calls the identity provider to authenticate the user and the request, and grants further access if the authentication is successful.
> 3. The Jaeger Deployment provides trace information.

The process of collecting traces by Jaeger looks as follows:

1. The application receives a request, either from an internal or external source.

> 2. If the application has Istio injection enabled, [Istio proxy](https://github.com/istio/proxy) propagates the correct [HTTP headers](docs/05-technical-reference/other-tracing-envoy-http-headers.md) of the requests to the Jaeger Deployment. Istio proxy calls Jaeger using the [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/) service, which exposes a Jaeger port compatible with the Zipkin protocol.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. If the application has Istio injection enabled, [Istio proxy](https://github.com/istio/proxy) enriches the request with the correct [HTTP headers](docs/05-technical-reference/other-tracing-envoy-http-headers.md) if missing and propagates them to the Application container. Furthermore Istio proxy sends the trace data for any intercepted request to Jaeger using the [Zipkin](https://zipkin.io/) service, which exposes a Jaeger port compatible with the Zipkin protocol.  
```

3. Jaeger stores the trace data on a PersistentVolume and makes the trace information available using an API and UI.

## Flow: Query traces

The process of querying traces from Jaeger looks as follows:

1. A Kyma user accesses the Jaeger UI to look for specific traces.
2. The user has [two options](../../04-operation-guides/operations/obsv-02-access-expose-kiali-grafana.md) to pass the request to the Jaeger Query service and retrieve the trace information:
   - If port forwarding has been set up, the user can access the Jaeger UI directly.

>    - If authentication using a OIDC provider has been configured, the request goes through the [Istio Ingress Gateway](TO_DO), which forwards the incoming connections to the service. Jaeger Query passes the request to the [Keycloak Gatekeeper](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-gatekeeper) for authorization. The Gatekeeper calls the identity provider to authenticate the user and the request, and grants further access if the authentication is successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If authentication using a OIDC provider has been configured, the request goes through the [Istio Ingress Gateway](TO_DO), which forwards the incoming connections to the [Keycloak Gatekeeper](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-gatekeeper) for authorization. The Gatekeeper calls the identity provider to authenticate the user and the request, and grants further access if the authentication is successful.
```

>    - If authentication using a OIDC provider has been configured, the request goes through the [Istio Ingress Gateway](TO_DO), which forwards the incoming connections to the [Keycloak Gatekeeper](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-gatekeeper) for authorization. The Gatekeeper calls the identity provider to authenticate the user and the request, and grants further access if the authentication is successful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - If authentication using a OIDC provider has been configured, the request goes through the [Istio Ingress Gateway](https://istio.io/latest/docs/tasks/traffic-management/ingress/ingress-control/), which forwards the incoming connections to the [Keycloak Gatekeeper](https://github.com/keycloak/keycloak-gatekeeper) for authorization. The Gatekeeper calls the identity provider to authenticate the user and the request, and grants further access if the authentication is successful.
```
